Document `upgrade-controller` architecture (#233)
appuio/openshift4-docs: docs/modules/ROOT/pages/references/architecture/upgrade_controller.adoc

[source,yaml]
----
url: "https://example.com/webhook"
http_config: <1>
  authorization:
    credentials: "token"
  proxy_url: "http://proxy.example.com"
annotations: <2>
  cluster_id: "bar"
  tenant_id: "foo"
----
<1> https://prometheus.io/docs/alerting/latest/configuration/#http_config[Alertmanager HTTP Config]
<2> Additional annotations to send with the webhook.

The controller should send a POST request to the webhook with a JSON payload.

[source,json]
----
{
  "version": "1", <1>

  "type": "UpgradeSkipped", <2>
  "status": "True", <3>
  "reason": "ClusterUnhealthy", <4>
  "message": "Critical alerts [MultipleDefaultStorageClasses, NodeFilesystemAlmostOutOfFiles] are firing", <5>

  "desiredVersion": { <6>
    "version": "4.6.34",
    "image": "quay.io/openshift-release-dev/ocp-release@sha256:1234567890abcdef"
  },

  "annotations": { <7>
    "cluster_id": "bar",
    "tenant_id": "foo"
  }
}
----
<1> The version of the webhook payload
<2> The type of the notification.
Inspired by https://github.com/kubernetes/apimachinery/blob/8d1258da8f386b809d312cdda316366d5612f54e/pkg/apis/meta/v1/types.go#L1481[`metav1.Condition`].
<3> The status of the notification.

> `True`, `False`, `Unknown`.

Reviewer: Ah yes, the classic tristate boolean
(jk, it's fine in this context)

The `.spec.desiredUpdate` field is set to start the upgrade.

=== The controller pins the upgrade at a time before the maintenance

The controller creates an `UpgradeJob` object at a time configured in the `UpgradeConfig` object.
The `UpgradeJob` contains a snapshot of the most recent version in the `.status.availableUpdates` field and a timestamp when the upgrade should start.

The `UpgradeJob` rechecks the available updates at the time of the upgrade.
If the version is no longer available, the upgrade is skipped and a notification is send to the webhook.

[source,yaml]
----
pinVersionWindow: "4h" <1>
----
<1> The time window before the maintenance window in which the upgrade version is pinned.
Upgrade jobs are created just in time if empty.
Scheduled upgrade jobs are created in this time window.

=== Interval / time window definition [[upgrade-schedule]]

* The controller must support customizable upgrade start time
* The controller must be able to support various upgrade rhythms (weekly, every two weeks, whenever there's an update)

> The upgrade start time is defined in the `UpgradeConfig` object.

Author: Valid point!

Added 
```yaml
startAfter: "2021-01-01T22:00:00+01:00" 
startBefore: "2021-01-01T23:00:00+01:00" 
```
to the job. and `maxUpgradeStartDelay: 2h` to the config.

The controller shouldn't try to upgrade a cluster that isn't healthy.

A `UpgradeJob` checks the cluster health before the upgrade and skips the upgrade if the cluster is unhealthy.
if an update is skipped, the controller should send a notification to the webhook.

The controller should also check the cluster health after the upgrade.
If the cluster is unhealthy, the controller should send a notification to the webhook.

Having custom queries allows customers or VSHN to extend checks to skip upgrades easily.

[source,yaml]
----
preUpgradeHealthChecks:
  timeout: "30m" <1>
  checkCriticalAlerts: true
  checkDegradedOperators: true
  excludeAlerts:
  - alertname: "KubePodCrashLooping"
  excludeNamespaces:
  - openshift-console
  excludeOperators:
  - openshift-monitoring
  customQueries:
  - query: "up{job=~"^argocd-.+$",namespace="syn"} != 1"
----
<1> How long to wait for the health checks to be successful.

==== Query alerts

The controller should query the cluster's Prometheus instance for alerts.
If there are any alerts with `severity=critical`, the cluster is unhealthy.

It should be possible to exclude alerts and alerts in namespaces.

==== Check cluster operator health

> The `ClusterVersion/version` object contains a queryable list of cluster operators health.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `ClusterVersion/version` object contains a queryable list of each cluster operator's health.
```

> If any of the operators is degraded, the cluster is unhealthy and shouldn't be upgraded.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If any of the operators is degraded, the cluster should be considered unhealthy and shouldn't be upgraded.
```

== Custom resource definition

=== ClusterVersion

The `ClusterVersion` CRD defines the parameters <<manage-version-object,synced to>> the  `ClusterVersion/version` object.

There must be only one `ClusterVersion` object in the cluster.

[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: managedupgrade.appuio.io/v1beta1
kind: ClusterVersion
metadata:
  name: version
spec:
  template: <1>
    capabilities:
      baselineCapabilitySet: v4.11
    channel: stable-4.11
    clusterID: bc75be34-e92d-4745-bb9d-8ec39e877854
    desiredUpdate: {} <2>
    upstream: https://api.openshift.com/api/upgrades_info/v1/graph
----
<1> Template for the `ClusterVersion/version` object.
<2> The `desiredUpdate` is ignored and set by the `UpgradeJob` controller.

=== UpgradeConfig

The `UpgradeConfig` CRD defines the upgrade schedule and the upgrade job template.
The reconciliation loop of the controller creates `UpgradeJob` objects based on the `UpgradeConfig` object.

[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: managedupgrade.appuio.io/v1beta1
kind: UpgradeConfig
metadata:
  name: cluster-upgrade
spec:
  schedule: <1>
    cron: "0 22 * * 2"
    isoWeek: "@odd"
    location: "Europe/Zurich"

>     suspend: false <4>

Reviewer: duplicate annotation `<4>`

  webhooks: <6>
    - url: "https://example.com/webhook"
      annotations:
        cluster_id: "bar"
        tenant_id: "foo"
----
<1> The upgrade schedule as defined in <<upgrade-schedule>>.
<2> The time window before the maintenance window in which the upgrade version is pinned.
UpgradeJobs are created at `schedule - pinVersionWindow`.
<3> The timeout for the upgrade.
The upgrade is marked as failed if it takes longer than this.
<4> The health checks to perform before the upgrade as defined in <<upgrade-health-checks>>.
<5> The health checks to perform after the upgrade as defined in <<upgrade-health-checks>>.
<6> The webhook to send notifications to as defined in <<upgrade-webhook>>.
Having multiple webhooks allows to send notifications to different systems.
Both the `UpgradeConfig` and the `UpgradeJob` have a `webhooks` field since both might send notifications.

=== UpgradeJob

An `UpgradeJob` is created for each upgrade.
It contains a snapshot of the most recent version in the `.status.availableUpdates` field, a snapshot of the config, and a timestamp when the upgrade should start.

[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: managedupgrade.appuio.io/v1beta1
kind: UpgradeJob
metadata:

>   name: cluster-upgrade-2021-01-01T22:00:00+01:00

Reviewer 3: This isn't a valid object name. Would it make sense to generate names with a hash since the object contains the `upgradeAt` information anyway?

apiVersion: managedupgrade.appuio.io/v1beta1
kind: UpgradeJob
metadata:
  name: cluster-upgrade-1609531200-ef11c47 <1>
spec:
  startAfter: "2021-01-01T22:00:00+01:00" <2>

>   startBefore: "2021-01-01T23:00:00+01:00" <3>

Reviewer 2: The example config has {{maxUpgradeStartDelay: 2h}}, but here we have an upgrade start window of 1h. Is this intentional, and if so, what's the logic to derive a start window of 1h from a config value of 2h?

Author: this was a typo, fixed
